Build a contact form with PHP (#3371)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/build-a-contact-form-with-php/index.md

                    </div>
                    <div class="input-field">
                        <i class="material-icons prefix">mode_edit</i>
                        <textarea id="message" class="materialize-textarea" name="message"><?php echo htmlspecialchars($message) ?></textarea>
                        <label for="message">Your Message*</label>
                        <div class="error"><?php echo $errors["message"] ?></div>
                    </div>
                    <div class="input-field center">
                        <input type="submit" class="btn-large z-depth-0" name="submit" id="submit" value="Send"></input>
                    </div>

                </form>

            </div>
        </div>

    </main>

    <script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/materialize/1.0.0/js/materialize.min.js"></script>

</body>

</html>
```

**What's happening here**

1. We created a basic form with the **POST** method which ultimately sends the request back to this page.

> To learn more about PHP forms, check out this awesome [article](https://www.section.io/engineering-education/working-with-forms-in-php/).

> 2. We are also using [materializeCSS](https://materializecss.com/about.html) for some default styling.
> 3. And finally we added some PHP variables within our HTML page to echo out either the error messages or the value that you inputted inside your form. Note that we haven't created these variables yet inside our PHP script so it will produce some errors if you refresh your browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. We are also using [materializeCSS](https://materializecss.com/about.html) for some default styling.
3. We added some PHP variables within our HTML page to echo out either the error messages or the value that was entered in the form. Note that we haven't created these variables yet inside our PHP script so it will produce some errors if you refresh your browser.
```

> The **htmlspecialchars** function is used to turn special characters returned into the ones HTML can understand and properly display. It prevents vulnerabilities like **cross-site scripting** attack (XSS) by replacing all harmful characters with harmless HTML entities. Therefore, always include this function when outputting users input in your HTML.

> ### Form Validation in PHP
> 
> In this section, we will be creating the logic of our web page to validate users input. In the same `index.php`, at the top of the file add the following code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Form Validation in PHP

In this section, we will create the logic of our web page inside the `index.php` to validate the user's input.  Add the code below at the top of the file.
```

```php
<?php

$success = "";
$error = "";
$name = $message = $email = "";
$errors = array('name' => '', 'email' => '', 'message' => '');

?>
```

**What you should know**

> 
> 1. We created several variables to store user input and error or success message
> 2. We also created an errors array for errors of specific error messages of the input fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

1. We created several variables to store user input and error or success messages.
2. We also created an errors array for errors of specific error messages of the input fields.
```

> Navigate back to the homepage and refresh the homepage, all should work well since we have stated all the variables in our PHP script.
> 
> > Notice that this PHP script is wrapped inside a `<?php ?>` tag, if not they would not be treated as PHP code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigate back to the homepage and refresh the homepage, all should work well since we have stated all the variables in our PHP script.

> Notice that this PHP script is wrapped inside a `<?php ?>` tag, if not it would not be treated as PHP code.
```

    } else {
        $email = SanitizeString($_POST["email"]);
        if (!filter_var($email, FILTER_VALIDATE_EMAIL)) {
            $errors["email"] = "Pls give a proper email address";
        }
    }

    if (empty(trim($_POST["message"]))) {
        $errors["message"] = "Please type your message";
    } else {
        $message = SanitizeString($_POST["message"]);
        if (!preg_match("/^[a-zA-Z\d\s]+$/", $message)) {
            $errors["message"] = "Only letters, spaces and maybe numbers allowed";
        }
    }

    if (array_filter($errors)) {
    } else {
        // Send email
    }
}
```

**What's happening here**

1. This conditional statement checks whether the form was submitted. If it was, it performs several functions to sanitize and validate users input or display any error messages.
2. The combination of the `trim` and `empty` function checks whether the form that is required was not left empty.
3. The `preg_match` function is used to check user input based on some criteria given using **regex**.
4. And finally, if there are no errors in the errors array, it's time to send the email

### Sending Email with PHP Mailer and Google Gmail SMTP server

> In other to send an email with Google Gmail we would need to have a Google account. If you don't have one, follow this [link](https://accounts.google.com/signup/v2/webcreateaccount?flowName=GlifWebSignIn&flowEntry=SignUp) to create a new Google account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to send an email with Google Gmail we  need to have a Google account. If you don't have one, follow this [link](https://accounts.google.com/signup/v2/webcreateaccount?flowName=GlifWebSignIn&flowEntry=SignUp) to create a new Google account.
```

> ---
> layout: engineering-education
> status: draft
> published: false
> url: /build-a-contact-form-with-php/
> title: Build a contact form with PHP
> description: Learn how to add a contact form to your PHP website.
> author: samuel-torimiro
> date:
> topics: [Languages]
> excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
> images:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---
layout: engineering-education
status: draft
published: false
url: /build-a-contact-form-with-php/
title: Building Contact Form with PHP
description:  The aim of this tutorial is to help the reader learn how to add a contact form to your PHP website.
author: samuel-torimiro
date:
topics: [Languages]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
images:
```

> layout: engineering-education
> status: draft
> published: false
> url: /build-a-contact-form-with-php/
> title: Build a contact form with PHP
> description: Learn how to add a contact form to your PHP website.
> author: samuel-torimiro
> date:
> topics: [Languages]
> excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
> images:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
layout: engineering-education
status: draft
published: false
url: /build-a-contact-form-with-php/
title: Build a Contact Form with PHP
description: The aim of this tutorial is to help the reader learn how to add a contact form to a PHP website.
author: samuel-torimiro
date:
topics: [Languages]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
images:
```

  - url: /engineering-education/build-a-contact-form-with-php/hero.jpg
    alt: PHP example image
---

[PHP](https://www.php.net/) is a programming language used for creating interactive web applications. It's a widely used language that runs on the server.
<!--more-->

> In this tutorial, will build a contact form with PHP. It will include the following features, form validation, the ability to send emails using Google Gmail SMTP server, and [PHPMailer library](https://github.com/PHPMailer/PHPMailer).
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, will build a contact form with PHP. It will include the following features, form validation, the ability to send emails using the Google Gmail SMTP server, and the [PHPMailer library](https://github.com/PHPMailer/PHPMailer).

```

![Project](/engineering-education/build-a-contact-form-with-php/project.png)
### Table of contents
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites).
- [Project Setup & Overview](#project-setup-overview).
- [PHP New Project](#php-new-project).
  - Step 1
  - Step 2
- [Creating the Form](#creating-the-form).
- [Form validation in PHP](#form-validation-in-php).
- [Sending Email with PHP Mailer and Google Gmail SMTP server](#sending-email-with-php-mailer-and-google-gmail-smtp-server).
  - Download PHP mailer
  - Configure your Gmail account
- [Conclusion](#conclusion).
### Prerequisites

To follow this tutorial the reader should;
- Have a basic understanding of HTML and PHP.
- Have PHP and XAMMP installed. We will use XAMMP for our development to run PHP locally on our machine.

Use this [page](https://www.apachefriends.org/index.html) to download and install XAMMP.

### Project Setup & Overview

> 
> In this section, we would be setting up our project. Recall that this tutorial uses XAMPP (a free cross-platform PHP development environment), therefore to follow exactly this tutorial download and install XAMPP using this [link](https://www.apachefriends.org/index.html). After the installation, start the `Apache` and `MySQL` module:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In this section, we would set up our project. Recall that this tutorial uses XAMPP (a free cross-platform PHP development environment), therefore after the installation, start the `Apache` and `MySQL` module:
```

![XAMPP Settings](/engineering-education/build-a-contact-form-with-php/xampp-settings.png)

Next, open your browser to [http://localhost/dashboard/](http://localhost/dashboard/), you should see the following:

![XAMPP Server Hompage](/engineering-education/build-a-contact-form-with-php/xampp-server-homepage.png)
### PHP New Project
Let's create a new PHP project.

### Step 1

Inside your `C: drive` open the folder `xampp`, inside this folder open the folder `htdocs` and create a new folder with the name `php-contact`.

### Step 2

> 
> Open the `php-contact` folder with your favourite code editor and create a new file called `index.php`. Paste the code below inside the `index.php` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Open the `php-contact` folder with your favorite code editor and create a new file called `index.php`. Paste the code below inside the `index.php` file.
```

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Document</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>Hello World</h1>
  </body>
</html>
```

Navigate back to [http://localhost/php-contact/](http://localhost/php-contact/), you should see a heading with the text **Hello World**. Note that we didn't add to the URL path `index.php` because by default in PHP navigating to the root page of a folder automatically loads the index.php file, although we could have explicitly stated it as [http://localhost/php-contact/index.php](http://localhost/php-contact/index.php).

### Creating the form

> 
> In this section, we will create a basic form Inside the `index.php`  to replace the previous code with code below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In this section, we will create a basic form Inside the `index.php`  to replace the previous code with the code below:
```

    } else {
        $email = SanitizeString($_POST["email"]);
        if (!filter_var($email, FILTER_VALIDATE_EMAIL)) {
            $errors["email"] = "Pls give a proper email address";
        }
    }

    if (empty(trim($_POST["message"]))) {
        $errors["message"] = "Please type your message";
    } else {
        $message = SanitizeString($_POST["message"]);
        if (!preg_match("/^[a-zA-Z\d\s]+$/", $message)) {
            $errors["message"] = "Only letters, spaces and maybe numbers allowed";
        }
    }

    if (array_filter($errors)) {
    } else {
        // Send email
    }
}
```

**What's happening here**

1. This conditional statement checks whether the form was submitted. If it was, it performs several functions to sanitize and validate users input or display any error messages.
2. The combination of the `trim` and `empty` function checks whether the form that is required was not left empty.
3. The `preg_match` function is used to check user input based on some criteria given using **regex**.
4. And finally, if there are no errors in the errors array, it's time to send the email

### Sending Email with PHP Mailer and Google Gmail SMTP server

> In order to send an email with Google Gmail we  need to have a Google account. If you don't have one, follow this [link](https://accounts.google.com/signup/v2/webcreateaccount?flowName=GlifWebSignIn&flowEntry=SignUp) to create a new Google account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to send an email with Google Gmail, we  need to have a Google account. If you don't have one, follow this [link](https://accounts.google.com/signup/v2/webcreateaccount?flowName=GlifWebSignIn&flowEntry=SignUp) to create a new Google account.
```

```php
try {

    $mail->setFrom('<paste your gmail account here>', '<paste your name here>');

    $mail->addAddress($email, $name);

    $mail->Subject = 'Build a contact form with PHP';

    $mail->Body = $message;

    // send mail

    $mail->send();

    // empty users input

    $name = $message = $email = "";

    $success = "Message sent successfully";

} catch (Exception $e) {

    // echo $e->errorMessage(); use for testing & debugging purposes
    $error = "Sorry message could not send, try again";
} catch (Exception $e) {

    // echo $e->getMessage(); use for testing & debugging purposes
    $error = "Sorry message could not send, try again";
}
```

**What's happening here**

1. We added the email sender and name **(setFrom function)**.
2. We also added the email recipient **(addAddress function)** with the input from our form.
3. We added the subject and body and finally sent the mail.

### Conclusion

We have come to the end of this tutorial on how to add a contact form to your PHP website using your Google Gmail account and PHPMailer library.

Grab the complete code from the [repo](https://github.com/Samuel-2626/php-contact).

Happy coding!

---

> 
> Peer Review Contributions by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Peer Review Contributions by:  [Atonya Dennis](/engineering-education/authors/atonya-dennis/)
```
